---
title: X Bioinformatics Student Symposium
tags: [Oral communication]
style: fill
color: success
description: Epigenome-wide analysis of blood methylation and upper-airway bacteria involved in asthma exacerbations.
---

## Abstract

**Background**: Genetic variation influences the upper airway microbiome associated with asthma exacerbations [1], yet the contribution of DNA methylation (DNAm) is unknown. This study aimed to identify leukocyte epigenetic markers associated with upper airway bacterial genera implicated in asthma exacerbations.

**Methods**: We analyzed the pharyngeal and nasal microbiome in 176 asthmatic Canary Islanders by 16S rRNA sequencing (V3–V4 regions). The blood epigenome was analyzed using the Illumina EPICv1 array. We conducted epigenome-wide association analysis to test for the association between 15 exacerbation-related bacterial genera and 709,923 CpGs, adjusting for age, sex, ancestry, and cell-type composition. Differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were identified and subjected to enrichment analysis. Multiple comparisons were controlled using a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.1.

**Results**: Pharyngeal *Campylobacter* abundance was significantly associated with DNAm at six CpG sites, involving the genes *GRIN2D*, *TCF4*, *LRRC4C*, *UGDH*, and *ZNF331* (p<5x10<sup>-7</sup>). Likewise, one CpG (*LOC101927284*) was significantly associated with nasal Dolosigranulum abundance (p=8.9x10<sup>-8</sup>). 249 and 336 DMRs were associated with exacerbation-related pharyngeal and nasal bacterial genera, respectively, previously identified in this cohort [2]. DMRs were enriched in genes involved in lung inflammation (FDR=0.07), and DNA transcription regulation (FDR=3.69x10<sup>-6</sup>). 

**Conclusion and contribution**: We reported novel associations between leukocyte DNA methylation at transcriptional regulatory loci and pulmonary inflammation-related genes and the upper airway microbiome involved in asthma exacerbations. These findings highlight the potential of epigenetic regulation as a mediator of host–microbiome crosstalk in asthma pathogenesis.

**Funding**: Fundación DISA (009/2024), MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 (PID2020-116274RB-I00).

**References**

[1] Perez-Garcia, J., et al. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2023, 152, 799-806

[2] Perez-Garcia, J., et al. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2023, 151, 706-715
