---
title: II Early Career Investigators' Congress on Bio-Organic Research
tags: [Flash talk]
style: fill
color: light
description: Epigenome-wide association study in blood of the salivary microbiome involved in asthma exacerbations.
---

## Abstract

**Background**: Genetic variation influences the salivary microbiome associated with asthma exacerbations [1], yet the contribution of DNA methylation (DNAm) is unknown. The study aimed to identify leukocyte epigenetic markers linked to salivary bacterial taxa implicated in asthma exacerbations.

**Methods**: We analyzed saliva and blood samples from 197 patients from the GEMAS study. The salivary microbiome was profiled by 16S-rRNA gene sequencing (V3-V4 regions) and the blood methylome with the Illumina EPICv1 array. We conducted epigenome‐wide association analyses on 693,029 CpGs with diversity indices and 3 bacterial genera associated with asthma exacerbations in this cohort [2]. Models were adjusted for age, sex, ancestry, and tissue heterogeneity. We identified differentially methylated regions (DMRs) using dmrff and evaluated them in a pathway enrichment analysis using Enrichr. Multiple comparisons were adjusted using a false discovery rate (FDR)<0.05.

**Results**: DNAm levels at cg07977900 (*RUBCN*) were genome-wide significantly associated with Shannon diversity (*p*=3.2x10<sup>-8</sup>). We identified 117 DMRs associated with exacerbation‐related bacterial genera (*Absconditabacteriales*, *Bifidobacterium*, *Capnocytophaga*), and 126 DMRs with alpha diversity indices. Top‐hit DMRs were localized in major genes related to the histocompatibility complex (MHC) (*PPP1R11*: 14 CpGs, *p*=1.6x10<sup>-15</sup>; *ATF6B*: 33 CpGs, *p*=6.4x10<sup>-29</sup>; *MPIG6B*: 29 CpGs, *p*=2.1x10<sup>-31</sup>) and to a toll‐like receptor signaling gene (*ZC3H12D*: 13 CpGs, *p*=2.2x10<sup>-19</sup>). Enrichment analysis revealed overrepresentation of MHC protein complex genes (adjusted *p*=7.1x10<sup>-3</sup>).

**Conclusion**: Our findings showed novel associations between leukocyte DNAm at immune‐related loci and the salivary microbiome involved in asthma exacerbations, highlighting the role of the innate immune system in host-microbiome interactions.

**Funding**: Fundación DISA (009/2024), MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 (PID2020-116274RB-I00).

**References**

1. Perez-Garcia, J., et al. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2023, 152, 799-806

2. Perez-Garcia, J., et al. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2023, 151, 706-715
