---
title: EAACI Congress 2026
tags: [Oral communication, Congress grant]
style: fill
color: secondary
description: The Upper-Airway Microbiome Involved in Asthma Exacerbations is Associated with Methylation Markers Linked to Immunity and Asthma Comorbidities.
---

## The Upper-Airway Microbiome Involved in Asthma Exacerbations is Associated with Methylation Markers Linked to Immunity and Asthma Comorbidities

Erick Castillo-Vargas, MSc<sup>1</sup>, Mario Martin-Almeida, MSc<sup>1</sup>, Elena Martin-Gonzalez, MSc<sup>1</sup>, Ruperto González-Pérez, MD, PhD<sup>2</sup>, José M. Hernández-Pérez, MD, PhD<sup>3,4</sup>, Olaia Sardón-Prado, MD, PhD<sup>5,6</sup>, Paloma Poza-Guedes, MD, PhD<sup>2</sup>, Elena Mederos-Luis, MD<sup>7</sup>, Paula Corcuera-Elosegui, MD, PhD<sup>5</sup>, Inmaculada Sánchez-Machín, MD, PhD<sup>7</sup>, Leyre López-Fernández, MD<sup>5</sup>, Jesús Villar, MD, PhD<sup>8,9,10,11</sup>, Andres Cardenas, PhD<sup>12</sup>, Fabian Lorenzo-Diaz, PhD<sup>1</sup>, Maria Pino-Yanes, PhD<sup>1,8,13</sup>, Javier Perez-Garcia, PhD<sup>1,12</sup>

<small>
<sup>1</sup> Genomics and Health Group, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, Cell Biology and Genetics, Universidad de La Laguna (ULL), La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.<br>
<sup>2</sup> Severe Asthma Unit, Allergy Department, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.<br>
<sup>3</sup> Pulmonary Medicine Service, Hospital Universitario de N.S de Candelaria, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.<br>
<sup>4</sup> Pulmonary Medicine Section, Hospital Universitario de La Palma, La Palma, Spain.<br>
<sup>5</sup> Division of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitario Donostia, San Sebastián, Spain.<br>
<sup>6</sup> Department of Pediatrics, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), San Sebastián, Spain.<br>
<sup>7</sup> Allergy Department, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.<br>
<sup>8</sup> CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.<br>
<sup>9</sup> Multidisciplinary Organ Dysfunction Evaluation Research Network (MODERN), Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.<br>
<sup>10</sup> Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad del Atlántico Medio, Tafira Baja, Las Palmas, Spain.<br>
<sup>11</sup> Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute at the St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.<br>
<sup>12</sup> Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, USA.<br>
<sup>13</sup> Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas (ITB), Universidad de La Laguna (ULL), La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.<br>
</small>

**Background**: Upper-airway diversity indices and microbial taxa linked to asthma exacerbations are partly influenced by host genetic variants, however the role of epigenetic regulation remains unknown. We aimed to identify leukocyte DNA methylation (DNAm) markers associated with the upper-airway microbiome related to asthma exacerbations.

**Methods**: From 197 adults and 52 children in the GEMAS study, we analyzed nasal, pharyngeal, saliva, and blood samples, profiling the upper-airway microbiome by 16S rRNA (V3–V4) targeted sequencing and the blood DNAm using the Illumina MethylationEPIC v1 array. We performed microbiome epigenome-wide association studies of 731,223 CpG sites with three alpha-diversity indices (Observed, Shannon, Faith) and 18 exacerbation-related bacterial genera, using regression models adjusted for age, sex, ancestry, and cell heterogeneity. Results were meta-analyzed across age groups, and differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were identified. Multiple comparisons were adjusted using a false discovery rate (FDR)<0.05. We assessed whether suggestively associated DNAm markers (*p*<5x10<sup>-5</sup>) were enriched in biological pathways or traits using EWASToolskit and Enrichr.

**Results**: DNAm levels at 59 CpG sites were associated with the diversity indices and the abundance of *Fusobacterium*, *Leptotrichia*, *Porphyromonas*, *Streptococcus*, *Campylobacter*, *Bifidobacterium*, and *Capnocytophaga*. Two CpGs mapped to *FOXA2* and *THBS1*, both previously described as potential therapeutic targets for asthma. Enrichment analysis revealed an overrepresentation of CpGs related to asthma, atopy, air pollution, and smoking (*p*<1x10<sup>-3</sup>). We detected 239 DMRs linked to the exacerbation-related bacterial genera and 162 DMRs associated with the diversity indices. Notably, 21 DMRs were in genes implicated in asthma pathophysiology. Gene-set enrichment analyses revealed an overrepresentation of asthma-related pathways (Wnt and TGF-β), relevant comorbidities (type 2 diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis), and genes interacting with trichostatin A, a potential drug for asthma exacerbations.

**Conclusion**: We revealed novel associations between leukocyte DNAm and the upper-airway microbiome composition linked to asthma exacerbations. These epigenetic signatures implicate immune and inflammatory pathways, asthma comorbidities, and putative drugs, supporting that microbiome-epigenome interactions may influence asthma exacerbations.

**Funding**: MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 (PID2020-116274RB-I00), Fundación DISA (009/2024), Catalina Ruiz Program (ACIISI), FPU(FPU24/00854).